Upwelling occurs near the coast when the wind stress has an equatorward alongshore component or in the case of nearshore negative (in the Southern Hemisphere) wind stress curl. Coastal divergence of the seaward Ekman current is forced by the alongshore equatorward wind stress, whereas upward Ekman pumping results from the wind stress curl. In EBUS, both coastal divergence and Ekman pumping may modulate the upwelling intensity.

One of the main limitations of these wind products is that measurements cannot be obtained near the coast. They are limited to a distance of 25 km and 50 km from the land for QuikSCAT and ERS, respectively. Intense cross‐shore wind gradients exist in this area known as the dropoff zone due to the land‐sea change in surface drag, coastal orography and sea surface temperature fronts. These gradients have a strong influence on the coastal circulation and upwelling intensity. Typically, these global wind products tend to overestimate the alongshore coastal winds and underestimate the wind stress curl, generating an excessively strong upwelling at the coast and a overly weak upwelling in the coastal band.

When the wind stress varies with position so that Ekman transport varies with position, there can be a convergence or divergence of water within the Ekman layer. Convergence results in downwelling of water out of the Ekman layer. Divergence results in upwelling into the Ekman layer. This is the mechanism that connects the frictional forcing by wind of the surface layer to the interior, geostrophic ocean circulation.

When wind blows over water, the top of the water starts moving. It shears against the water below it, so that water starts moving too. The momentum from the wind is transferred down into lower layers of the water. This water also feels the Coriolis force. The direction it ends up moving in depends on the balance of friction/drag and Coriolis force. On average, the water moves to the right of the wind in the northern hemisphere; if the wind is blowing northward, the water moves eastward.

Now imagine you have strong wind blowing northward at one location and weaker wind to the right of it. The water at the first location moves to the right, and it does so faster than the water at the second location (because the wind forcing the water is stronger at the first location). The water converges at the second location, pushing the water downward. This is how the curl of the wind stress (the northward wind changing in the east-west direction) is related to the water convergence (the eastward current changing in the east-west direction) and hence to water being pushed down or pulled up. Positive wind stress curl pulls water up; negative wind stress curl pushes it down.

Aims:
- In this study we investigate the influence of the wind stress forcing on the coastal circulation.